---
title: 'Book notes: Atlas Shrugged'
lastUpdated: '2020-09-20'
tags: ['Book Notes', 'Philosophy', 'Productivity']
---

If you have read Atlas Shrugged, you will know that it is a book that
throws its beliefs in your face. With sixty-page speeches extolling
the values of libertarianism, a caricature division between the heroic
industrialists and their slimy socialist rivals, and dialogue which is
so meaning-laden that it reads like a sermon, Atlas Shrugged is not a
subtle book.

Yet, however extreme the book's depiction of 'good' and 'evil' gets, I
couldn't help but find some of the ideas inspiring and original (at
least coming from a left-leaning, cosmopolitan and British
background). This post serves as a quick analysis of the ideas in
Atlas Shrugged I found most powerful, most troubling, and most
interesting.

### Valuing Creation

Above almost anything else, Atlas Shrugged praises creative activity.
For Rand, work is not slave-like labour, but an inventive, positive
act. The praise of work is both for the result of what the mind
produces (time saved, wealth created, experiences had), and the
subjective experience of what doing a good job feels like.

The descriptive accounts of joyous creation in Atlas Shrugged felt
powerfully human to me. To see the characters solving problems and
inventing solutions reminded me of some of the best moments of my
childhood where possibility was unbounded and personal capability
unconstrained.

I think this perspective of optimism is often forgotten, disregarded,
or misunderstood. Although tech has adopted the memes of wealth
creation and zero-sum avoidance, this does not, as far as I can tell,
translate to the rest of society.

### Personal Responsibility

Perhaps the idea that had the most practical impact on me was that of
personal responsibility. If one thing defines the heroes of Atlas
Shrugged, it is their willingness to say "I take responsibility for
this".

In work, gaps in responsibility between individuals and teams
inevitably appear. Saying "I take responsibility" fills these gaps and
the work that needs to be done isn't collectively dodged. Furthermore,
even if you fail or your beliefs are mistaken, putting your neck on
the line helps you course-correct your beliefs over time (Ã  la
[Skin in the Game](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Skin-Game-Hidden-Asymmetries-Daily/dp/0141982659/ref=sr_1_1?dchild=1&keywords=skin+in+the+game&qid=1600618517&sr=8-1)).

Seeing Atlas Shrugged's characters adopt this extreme form of
responsibility gave sufficient improvement to my productivity at work
that it was noticed by my manager. Even if it is uncomfortable at
times, more responsibility is almost always a good thing.

### Joy as Meaning; Meaningless Pain

> "We never had to take any of it seriously, did we?"
>
> <footer>Dagny Taggart</footer>

This quote stuck with me more than any other in the book. Initially,
the idea that pain ("it") is not to be taken seriously did not make
sense to me. It only crystallised when combined with the contrasting
claim that joy is meaning.

Perhaps at the surface, Rand's heroes are rational and cold. Yet they
are also, on a deep level, lovers of life and joyously happy. They go
beyond the removal of pain and actively enjoy everything they do.
Creating, thinking, love, fully fleshed-out human flourishing, are the
ultimate values in Rand's philosophy. Next to these gifts, how could
something as insignificant as pain mean anything at all?

I find exercise to be one of the best microcosms for this idea.
Training hard is not pleasurable. Your lungs sting, your muscles burn,
your mind aches with the mental exertion of pushing harder. But viewed
in the grand scheme of the race, these things simply do not matter. It
is not that the pain is diminished or overcome in face of a more
important goal, rather that it becomes worthless when the joy of going
faster, further, and harder is embraced.

Especially for the British, the idea that we should be unabashedly
happy is an uncomfortable one. Although I had had a similar thought in
my mind before reading the book, there was also something shameful and
private about it. I am glad that I now have something more concrete to
anchor the emotion of gratitude to.

### Ignoring Reality

For a thinker who claims that your beliefs must stick to reality, Rand
certainly likes to ignore many features of the real world. There is no
mention of racial discrimination, let alone a non-white character. The
value that one must pursue one's own individual goals without
exception is almost comical in the face of climate change.

The whole book is hyperbole and is hard to translate into reality. Of
course, the villains of the novel are terrible people, but they are
often crude fictional tools that are difficult to learn anything from.
Reality is not black and white and important decisions rely upon
nuance which is simply absent from the book.

Rand's Objectivism is dressed up as obviously, tautologically correct.
Yet it is an incomplete description and there is a leap from the truly
objective to Rand's Objectivism that needs some explaining.

### Conclusion

Those who disagree with Rand's views will find its uncompromising
position uncomfortable to read at times. While I would recommend
reading it to almost everybody, for most, I suspect the main value
will be to better understand a position you disagree with.

Yet the descriptions of striving, creating, thriving, and thinking
stick with me. I think the book is mostly wrong, but there is
something it gets powerfully, uniquely right.
