---
title: 'Projects'
---

## Jobs

### Attio

##### August 2021 → Present

I am a product engineer at [Attio](https://attio.com/), a startup
building the next generation of CRM. I work across the our TypeScript,
React and Node stack to create features our users love.

### Memrise

##### May 2019 → July 2021

I was a software engineer at [Memrise](https://memrise.com/), the
world's most entertaining language learning app. At Memrise, I drove
forward our transition from a monolithic Django app to a more modern
REST API/Next.js stack. I delivered high-quality features to a user
base of hundreds of thousands and enjoyed seeing the impact I had for
our language-learning users.

### PeopleGoal

##### June 2018 → April 2019

My first engineering role was at [PeopleGoal](https://peoplegoal.com).
I was responsible for building and designing features for a
data-focused, enterprise React/React application and lead the
construction of a new and performant content site, built on Next.js.

## Side Projects

### YouTube

On my
[YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCoM-EVJlUBxoGdSkyQaEH4w),
I make videos about product engineering and programmer productivity.
[You can subscribe here for new videos each week](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCoM-EVJlUBxoGdSkyQaEH4w).

### TypePerf

[TypePerf](https://typeperf.com) is the best touch typing tool for
developers.

As of January 2022, it is in closed beta but I'm taking sign ups if
you're interested in improving your typing as fast as possible.

### Blog

On this site, I blog about technology, engineering, and productivity.

I also enjoy experimenting with new front-end ideas in its
[codebase](https://github.com/mulholo/jmulholland-dot-com).

### Copy That

Copy That was a newsletter and website dedicated to sharing the best
of interesting web design. It is now archived but you can find the old
code (React, Node, GrapghQL,TypeScript, Next.js)
[here](https://github.com/mulholo/copy-that-front) and
[here](https://github.com/mulholo/copy-that-back).

## Education

### Philosophy, University of Bristol

##### 2015 → 2018

I studied philosophy from 2015 to 2018 at Bristol. I specialised in
the analytical end of the philosophy spectrum with a focus on topics
such as the philosophy of science, decision-theory, probability,
philosophy of maths and logic. I continue my interest to the present
and still love a good philosophy book.
