---
title: 'Design Tools I Want'
date: '2020-06-30'
---

Since Sketch, Figma and Framer have come on the scene, design tools
have become relatively pleasant to work with. However, Sketch is 10
years old this September and we're still yet to progress past the
basic paradigm of drawing boxes on a screen. This blog post is an
articulation of what I want to come next.

## Rule-Based Design

The first paradigm of improvement is the better implementation of
rules that developers an designers already use. Many companies now
have design systems, yet design tools often seem painfully unaware of
the constraints that their users work with. Why can't I constrain the
colours I use in Figma, rather than just picking them? Why am I
manually dragging objects around to fit our 8px grid? Of course, code
is the ultimate constraint but its API is too wide and not all
designers code. Plus, GUIs are often faster to work with, especially
in experimentation stages. I'd love to see design tool config for
utilising constraint-based design. Think
[Zeroheight](https://zeroheight.com/) but with your design system
affecting Figma's functionality.

## AI-Assisted Design

The next step from rule-based design is AI-assisted design. While some
elements can easily be codified in rules (spacing, colours, icon
choice, typography, and layouts if you are more adventurous), others
are still _somewhat_ formulaic yet with a degree of fluidity that
makes them harder to deal with through rule-based design. For this
category of design tasks, I'd like to systems which aid the designer
and automate trial and error tasks. Can we auto-generate desktop
designs from mobile ones? Do we need to run A/B experiments or is this
the kind of thing that a clever model could help us with (if only
partially)? Can we quickly suggest different layout options from the
elements we already have on the screen? Another thing I'd like in my
design tool is a linter to spot visual errors. Just as
[`eslint`](https://eslint.org/) warns me when I forget to use a
variable, why can't my design tool warn me when something is
misaligned? This sounds like an achievable tasks for an image
recognition model.

## AI-Generated Design

The final step in the design tool hierarchy is complete design
generation. At this point, the design tool becomes redundant, instead
being replaced by a black box where you pass in a spec and receive a
full, responsive mockup. Of course, this goal can be achieved in
degrees. Although basic graphic design is a far easier task than
constructing responsive mockups,
[Alibaba is already generating product images](https://www.alibabacloud.com/blog/alibaba-luban-ai-based-graphic-design-tool_594294)
with AI. Just as a head architect will design a whole building and
then pass the details off to other employees lower down the hierarchy,
we can similarly imagine a designer conceiving of a high-level design
and then letting a GAN fill in the details.

---

This is an area I'm actively exploring and I would love to hear from
you with any thoughts you have on the topic. Drop me a
[DM](https://twitter.com/mulholo).
